## Disclaimer:

The BibleVox project produces a pronunciation lexicon, in CMU dictionary format (i.e. Scheme code), of the proper names appearing in English language translations of the Bible. The BibleVox lexicon also includes corrections for common words identified as being mispronounced by the stock release of Festival. In Festival parlance, the BibleVox lexicon is presently supplied as an "addenda" to the stock CMU pronunciation dictionary. However, certain entries within the stock CMU dictionary are able to take precedence over some common word corrections supplied by the BibleVox lexicon. Therefore, a few common English language words will continue to be incorrectly pronounced until a later stage of this project is completed that will permit the CMU dictionary itself to be updated with BibleVox lexicon entries.

The BibleVox author claims that an undisputed authoritative reference for "correct" Bible proper name pronunciations does not exist. Period. All (i.e. not some) of the authoritative references that the BibleVox author has studied deviates from the next in various ways. The authors of the best references admit that disagreements exist among "experts" and never go so far as to proclaim their work to be a final authority. One reason for this is that pronunciations actually change over time and lean more toward expediency rather than correctness. It is the BibleVox author's personal opinion that this is a pity since, he believes, it causes our Bible name rendering to become more inconsistent and degraded over time. The BibleVox author may at a later date more aggressively document the complex subject of proper name pronunciations of English language Bible translations. For now, he simply states that the BibleVox lexicon provides pronounceable pronunciation "suggestions" intended to prevent them from being butchered beyond recognition and to further the pleasure and utility of being able to listen to God's Word. Period.

The BibleVox author has determined that the rendering of Bible proper name pronunciations in a computer voice is a little different than instructing a human. Many modern day Bible proper name pronunciation guides tend to overuse "schwa" (i.e. unstressed) vowel sounds. This is expedient for instructing humans on acceptable Bible name pronunciations. However, a computer speech engine (more specifically, Festival) is more exacting in its rendering than are most humans. The overuse of schwas tends to degrade computer speech engine diction and cause it to become "muddy". Depending on placement, a schwa can cause a computer speech engine rendering of some Bible names to drop entire syllables and thus run the remaining ones together. This has the undesired effect of causing the spoken words to drastically diverge from their written form, which becomes confusing to the reader. The English language vocabulary has many such pronunciation ambiguities and exceptions. However, the BibleVox author asserts that the English language Bible translators were attempting to render Bible proper names in a form able to be both pronounceable and recognizable in written form. He, therefore, claims that dropping entire syllables is not a correct general solution for acceptable Bible proper name pronunciations. He does concede, however, that certain mispronunciations have become over time widely accepted and cannot be reverted to a more correct form. For example, Cherub, by long standing tradition, is no longer pronounced more correctly as Kerub.
